[Music]
in 2017
an important new phrase entered the
lexicon
now you're in the sunken place how long
had we all been languishing
in the sunken place jordan peele's
paradigm-shifting first feature as
writer director
had an impact far beyond most directors
fifth
sixth or seventh get out yo
get out with a cultural phenomenon
to date peel has released two smart
creepy era defining horror films what do
you want
yet this filmography hardly reflects the
true scale
of peel's influence a man both nowhere
and everywhere
at the same time a reviver of cult genre
classics
and an executive producer of whole new
ones
jordan peele is a horror auteur and
creator mogul of film and television
what dimension
are you even in
it's no surprise that peel's love of
scary movies began early
growing up in new york city peel was
raised by his single mother
in an apartment just a few blocks away
from the infamous dakota building
the setting for what would become one of
his favorite films
creepy classic rosemary's baby what have
you done to it
what have you done to its eyes
[Music]
but despite this lifelong love of scary
movies
it was in a comedy that he got his
showbiz start
rising to stardom with keegan michael
key on their freewheeling and
endlessly inventive sketch show key and
peel all black people have the shine
you never shine with another black
person before no key and peel ran from
2012 to 2015
and could only have been the work of
true horror genre nerds
you getting this yeah what is up this
also marks the beginning of a creative
theme for peel
using the tropes of american horror
movies to explore the real-life horror
of american racism
hey that's some these are some
racist zombies why would
you even lock the door i mean the
window's broken and
oh oh hell no
no no comedy tv star to academy
award-winning horror director
isn't a typical hollywood career
trajectory
but maybe he hasn't really moved that
far at all
maybe that sweet spot where comedy
becomes scary
and horror becomes funny was always
where jordan peele was headed
peel's first feature as a producer and
co-writer
was 2016's kianu an action comedy
which of course included plenty of
carefully planted horror notes
you uh you ever played golf once two
years ago i wasn't very good
then in february 2017 came the biting
satirical horror
get out i do know tiger
oh that's great gordon loves tiger
oh the best i've ever seen it was peel's
directorial debut
but it proved he was already able to
achieve that perfect tonal balance of a
scary
movie veteran
the story follows chris a black
photographer who meets his white
girlfriend's parents for the first time
so how long has this been going on this
thing
things begin pretty awkwardly but soon
get
much much worse get out expertly
combined classic genre thrills with
smart political satire
why black people
who knows in fact peel had been engaging
with the political moment since his
sketch show days
i know a lot of folks say that i haven't
done a good job at
communicating my accomplishments to the
public because y'all don't
listen
as a tv comedian he nailed the 44th
president's voice
as a filmmaker he delivered a damning
indictment of the big lie of the obama
era
that america had now ascended to a place
of post-racial harmony
hair skin has been in favor for the past
couple of hundreds of years
but now the pendulum is swung back black
is in fashion get out wasn't a comedy
but it was partially inspired by a razor
sharp and provocative eddie murphy
stand-up bit in the amberville heart a
ghost told them to get out the house
white people stayed in there i would
have been in the house and said oh baby
this
is beautiful we got chandelier hanging
up here kids outside playing it's a
beautiful neighborhood
cleaning underwear i really love them
this is really nice
too bad we can't stay baby it also had a
clear non-horror antecedent and guess
who's coming to dinner
the 1967 film in which sydney poitier
plays the black fiance meeting his new
in-laws for the first time
mom this is john
yet that film like most other hollywood
takes on race relations
had been mainly from the white
character's perspective
in the 2009 film the blind side
swooping in and solving racial injustice
one sandra bullock her oscar
never had one before what a room to
yourself
i bet and the white savior trope has
been rewarded with academy awards
multiple times since i know it's scary
in the help
a simplistic and sentimental drama set
in 1960s mississippi
the civil rights movement is reframed as
a personal growth opportunity for emma
stone's character skeeter
it was nominated for four oscars and one
best supporting actress
that's absurd in the well-intentioned
but wrong-headed green book
it's viggo mortensen's italian-american
driver who is absolved of the sins of
american racism
while any nuance in the black historical
perspective is largely flattened
green book won three oscars including
best picture
in the same year that black panther was
nominated
the armitages are so good to us
[Music]
they treat us like family get out did
huge box office business
won critical acclaim and received major
award nominations
but its nomination for best musical or
comedy
at the golden globes suggested the
industry was still unsure
whether to laugh or cry
maybe that's because get out wasn't
really comedy
or horror but a revival of another genre
entirely
the social thriller
in interviews peel defined the social
thriller
as a movie in which the ultimate villain
is society
itself be that society's control over
women's bodies
as in rosemary's baby we're your friends
rosemary
there's nothing to be afraid of rosemary
honest and truly there is
there's nothing but a mild sedative to
calm you down
a woman's supposed place in society as
in the exquisitely eerie the stepford
wives
or wider issues of class and
gentrification
as in wes craven's twisted fairy tale
the people
under the stairs you and your brother
landlords of over 50 buildings in this
city all of which you've allowed to
deteriorate into rat infested hellholes
where you guys get rich charging
ridiculous rents
what social thrillers had previously
done with class and gender
peel wanted to do with race come on i
get it
white family black servants it's a
total cliche i wasn't gonna take you
there well you didn't have to believe me
but the racism that get out targets
isn't the hoodwearing cross-burning kind
it's something more insidious something
a bit closer to home for the white
liberals watching and applauding in
cinemas
by the way i i would have voted for
obama for a third term if i could
best president my lifetime handstand
i agree yeah the casting of bradley
whitford was an inspired choice
an actor best known for his role in that
ultimate us liberal fantasy drama
the west wing victory is mine victory is
mine
great day in the morning people victory
is mine morning josh
but giving language and form to the
microaggressions experienced by black
people
was more powerful than mere political
satire
get out allowed that release of tension
that is the hallmark of both the best
comedy
and the best horror yet the term
social thriller like its cousin elevated
horror
has a film snob undertone which rankles
true genre fans like peel himself
know that all good scary movies say
something about the society that made
them they come from another world
whether it's of pod people taking over
the world during the height of communist
panic
or a regular ghost story about a
comfortable family home
attacked from within
peel is certainly no snob he's the
ultimate pop culture aficionado
and he uses his knowledge to subvert
audience expectations
by for instance casting mani from
generation defining tv drama girls
i can't take you anymore you think that
everyone in the world is out to
humiliate you you're like a big ugly
wound
ever so slightly against type as another
elegant and privileged young woman
that you don't have to give him
your idea because you haven't done
anything wrong
who just does a better job of concealing
her true motivations
i will feed you to my children or
showing the two extraordinary black
superheroes
played by winston duke and lupita
nyong'o
can be an ordinary american mom and dad
by the release of peel's second film as
director us
in march 2019 two events had changed the
context for black filmmakers and
audiences
firstly a best picture win for barry
jenkins beautiful coming-of-age tale
moonlight
and then marvel's spectacular black
panther which became a huge critical and
commercial smash
this along with get out's own impact
created space for peel to tell a black
story that isn't just
about race us harked back to one of
horror's oldest tropes
the deep-rooted freudian fear of
encountering a doppelganger
that is someone who looks just like you
but
isn't it's full of eerie mirror images
doubles and uncanny twins
the genre lineage is clear look at this
episode from one of peel's favorite tv
shows
the original twilight zone in which a
woman has an unsettling encounter
with herself
but once again peel layers political and
social meanings on top
we're americans the relationship between
those living happy lives up on the
surface
and their doubles struggling underground
is an intentionally elastic metaphor
do the tethered represent the world's
poor left behind by prosperity
the colonial crimes we'd rather keep
buried in the past
or our traumatized former selves
[Music]
one thing is for sure when the
revolution comes even your most
coveted consumer goods will betray you
opilia call the police sure playing
the police by n.w.a
all this reverses the usual slasher film
cliche
the one where the black guy carks it
first
in peel's world the final girl of horror
is a black guy making black people the
protagonists of horror
instead of expendable slasher fodder
feels fresh
but in a typically pelian fashion it
also references the original black
horror protagonist
ben played by dwayne jones in night of
the living dead
he survived a zombie attack only to be
shot dead by police officers
hit him in the head right between the
eyes
[Music]
get out tease is a similarly bleak
ending but peele decided to
once again subvert our expectations
providing the audience with a
well-earned moment of release
this isn't just a neat reversal of
scary movie cliches
it's logical too when you think about
the level of everyday violent threat
experienced by many black people in the
u.s doesn't it make sense that the
person best equipped to endure
and overcome would be a guy like chris
or a woman like adelaide
you